[CONTENT] ReactOS 0.4.16 press release (#144)
reactos/web-content: content/project-news/reactos-0416-released.md

---
title:       "Introducing ReactOS 0.4.16"
author:      "ReactOS Team"
# 2026-08-28
date:        2026-07-02
tags:        [ "release" ]
banner:      "img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/banner.png"
---

We are pleased to announce the release of ReactOS 0.4.16!
After a year and a half of development, we’re excited to showcase the improvements we’ve made between a new graphical installer; a unified bootcd and livecd image; video, audio, networking, and storage stack improvements; a new install type; and third-party code syncs.

## Graphical Installer and the All-in-One Boot CD
Historically, ReactOS offered two images for download, a livecd which let you test ReactOS in a read-only environment, and a bootcd which let you install ReactOS to your hard disk using a text-based installer.

> Thanks to the efforts of Hermès BÉLUSCA - MAÏTO ([hbelusca](https://github.com/hbelusca)), ReactOS 0.4.16 has a new graphical installer and a combined bootcd and livecd.

Author: I prefer to keep this simple instead of trying to explain the difference between first and second stage here.

> Thanks to the efforts of Hermès BÉLUSCA - MAÏTO ([hbelusca](https://github.com/hbelusca)), ReactOS 0.4.16 has a new graphical installer and a combined bootcd and livecd.

Reviewer: Makes sense

{{< figure link="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/gui-setup-5.png" src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/gui-setup-5.png" caption="Graphical setup complete">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

You can read about Hermès's work on this in his blog posts:
- [Part 1 - September 2023: Partly Wine-syncing setupapi](https://reactos.org/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi/)
- [Part 2 - October-November 2023: Making partitioning UI work](https://reactos.org/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning/)
- [Part 3 - December 2023: First tests](https://reactos.org/blogs/gui-setup-part3-first-testing-problems/)

## Video
During 0.4.15 development, core developer Hervé Poussineau ([hpoussin](https://github.com/hpoussin)) put in the ground work for multi-monitor support and falling back to a VGA driver when display drivers fail to load.
This foundation enabled us to continue pursuing better video driver compatibility in 0.4.16.
For years ReactOS has been plagued by different issues with all major video driver vendors.

Nvidia GPUs in particular had been plagued by a slow down issue that many talented contributors and developers investigated.

> Eventually Justin Miller ([The_DarkFire_](https://github.com/darkfire01)) recognized that the kernel was running out of system page table entries (PTEs) when loading third party drivers.

Author: I don't think it's needed. I like how this reads without the comma slightly more, but it's not a big deal either way.

> Eventually Justin Miller ([The_DarkFire_](https://github.com/darkfire01)) recognized that the kernel was running out of system page table entries (PTEs) when loading third party drivers.

Author: Added one anyways

This limitation was most apparent with graphics drivers, which allocate more memory than most other drivers.
The_DarkFire_ changed the memory layout used by our memory manager to increase the amount of system PTEs.
This fixed the hard-to-debug slowdown bug with Nvidia graphics drivers.
On AMD video drivers, the OpenGL window would end up blank.

> This was resolved by rewriting ExtEscape, inspired by a patch from the late core developer Jim Tabor ([jimtabor](https://github.com/jimtabor)).

Author: I corrected the name, but I'm not sure we need to explain what `ExtEscape` is, I much prefer the way it reads now. Later we also mention that it improves win32k.

> This was resolved by rewriting ExtEscape, inspired by a patch from the late core developer Jim Tabor ([jimtabor](https://github.com/jimtabor)).

Reviewer: My personal impression is that by just making a random function name that nobody knows except those who have written win32 display drivers, without at least mentoring where it is from, just gives a feeling of "name-dropping".

These improvements improved stability, better handled resource management of the new devices, and fixed many edge case bugs in our win32k.
We thank our contributors and developers for their time as these fixes needed an incredible amount of research.

## Audio

> For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete HD audio support.

Reviewer 2: @HBelusca yes, "HD" is actually an abbreviation and in this case it means "High Definition" and belongs to audio. It's actually widely used terminology, not just our internal term, so it does not need an explanation here I think.
<img width="652" height="96" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d0edc7c0-2833-4e2a-93e8-261c12c7ff5b" />
It can also be used together with other terms like "High Definition screen resolution", but for all other cases, "HD" means "High Definition" too.

> For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete HD audio support.

Reviewer 2: Or, alternatively, the abbreviation can simply be replaced with "High Definition", to avoid confusing for some readers.

> For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete HD audio support.

Reviewer: Then I think we can do as in the screencapture from above:
```suggestion
For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete High Definition Audio (HD Audio) support.
```
and in the rest of the text, just using "HD audio" as already done.

> For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete HD audio support.

Reviewer 2: I suggest even better:
```suggestion
For years ReactOS had unstable and incomplete High Definition (HD) audio support.
```
To avoid duplicating "Audio" word.

HD audio drivers depend on a bus driver (`hdaudbus.sys`), including drivers from AMD, IDT, NVIDIA, Realtek, and SigmaTel.
Our initial implementation was written long ago by Johannes Anderwald ([janderwald](https://github.com/janderwald)).
This implementation was never finished, and was a frequent source of bug checks when attempting to install audio codecs with an HD audio controller.

> Core developer Oleg Dubinskiy ([oleg-dubinskiy](https://github.com/oleg-dubinskiy)) imported [sklhdaudbus](https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus), a new HD audio bus driver, to replace our old implementation.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, makes sense. Like follows:
```suggestion
Core developer Oleg Dubinskiy ([oleg-dubinskiy](https://github.com/oleg-dubinskiy)) imported [sklhdaudbus](https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus), a new (3rd-party) HD audio bus driver, to replace our old implementation.
```

> Core developer Oleg Dubinskiy ([oleg-dubinskiy](https://github.com/oleg-dubinskiy)) imported [sklhdaudbus](https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus), a new HD audio bus driver, to replace our old implementation.

Reviewer: without the parentheses perhaps.

> Core developer Oleg Dubinskiy ([oleg-dubinskiy](https://github.com/oleg-dubinskiy)) imported [sklhdaudbus](https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus), a new HD audio bus driver, to replace our old implementation.

Author: I don't think that's necessary. Anything we import is third-party by definition.

> Core developer Oleg Dubinskiy ([oleg-dubinskiy](https://github.com/oleg-dubinskiy)) imported [sklhdaudbus](https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus), a new HD audio bus driver, to replace our old implementation.

Reviewer: Do as you wish

HD audio controllers which are compatible with Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 should now work in ReactOS 0.4.16.
Here is a video showing a Realtek HD audio controller working on ReactOS 0.4.16:

{{< video src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/hdaudbus.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Setting up the installation, and file copy hang">}}

> The new HD audio bus driver depends on the Kernel Mode Driver Framework (KMDF).

Reviewer 2: Isn't  the license MIT? In case it is, it's probably not necessarily no mention it? 🤔

> The new HD audio bus driver depends on the Kernel Mode Driver Framework (KMDF).

Reviewer 2: Same question regarding to the new HDAudBus driver itself.

Microsoft open sourced KMDF as part of the [Windows-Driver-Frameworks](https://github.com/microsoft/Windows-Driver-Frameworks) repository.
The_DarkFire_ imported KMDF for the new HD audio bus driver, and now we can use KMDF to import or develop other drivers.

Oleg also fixed the volume and balance sliders in Sound Properties (`mmsys.cpl`) and Audio Volume Mixer (`sndvol32.exe`).
Now the volume and balance levels are saved and restored on reboot when using an HD audio codec.

> In addition, Oleg updated the audio device enumeration code to support more sound cards.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I've just forgot, sorry. I think it's worth to mention here my PnP and setupapi fixes required for Windows audio stack too. Also, improve an explanation of audio devices enumeration fix, about what was actually done with it. Like follows:

```suggestion
In addition, Oleg updated the audio device enumeration code to skip non-working audio devices, allow proceeding to the working ones, and hence to properly detect more sound cards.
Also, he implemented retrieving device interface aliases from Registry in ReactOS PnP stack and fixed device interface Registry key creation in SetupApi,
which allows to load audio stack (system audio drivers and user-mode components) from Windows 2000, XP and Server 2003:
drmk.sys, kmixer.sys, ks.sys, portcls.sys, swenum.sys, sysaudio.sys, wdmaud.sys, wdmaud.drv and winmm.dll.
However, the sound doesn't work yet with such a replacement because of other bugs.
```

Reviewer 2: Aside question: should audio replacement components list be mentioned too?

Author: No, that is redundant and hard to read. Meriam Webster defines enumeration as "the act or process of making or stating a list of things." If you fix the audio device enumeration code, you are fixing the list of detected audio devices; and the end result of that is that more audio devices work.

Reviewer 2: OK, then it still makes sense to mention my PnP and SetupApi fixes only, in case you did not commit the 2nd part of my suggestion yet. Thanks.

Author: I added a sentence about your PnP and SetupAPI fixes. 🙂

Reviewer 2: Thanks. That's even shorter and better.
And the list of the components for replacement could be also mentioned (optionally).

## Networking
ReactOS 0.4.16 also adds asynchronous connection support.
This improves networking performance by allowing applications to execute networking operations without stalling.

> This also improves application compatibility as many programs assume that these asynchronous connection APIs are always present.

Reviewer 3: I suggest that instead of "APIs" you use "API's" with the extra apostrophe.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't "API's" have wrong meaning here? Personally to me, "APIs" sounds like "API" in plural, but "API's" seems to mean "something of/related to API".

Reviewer 3: Upon further thought, the "APIs" is probably better because this is not a possessive case.

ReactOS 0.4.16 introduces a new ATA driver developed by contributor Dmitry Borisov ([disean](https://github.com/disean)).
This new ATA driver allows ReactOS to boot in far more environments, including inside Hyper-V.

In 2021 we imported and enabled the open-source Microsoft FastFAT driver.
Unfortunately, this broke our ability to repair FAT partitions using chkdsk.
Core developer Doug Lyons ([Doug-Lyons](https://github.com/Doug-Lyons)) fixed our FAT chkdsk routines to work with the Microsoft FastFAT driver.

Core developer Mark Jansen ([learn-more](https://github.com/learn-more)) added a disk cleanup utility in ReactOS 0.4.16.
The disk cleanup utility is compatible with extensions for the Windows disk cleanup utility, allowing third party programs to clean up disk usage as well as the operating system.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/chkdsk.png" src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/chkdsk.png" caption="Check disk">}}
{{< figure link="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/cleanmgr.png" src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/cleanmgr.png" caption="Disk cleanup">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

## ReactOS Server Core

> ReactOS supports Workstation and Server install types.

Reviewer 2: IMHO, "Installation" looks more applicable here.

This limitation was most apparent with graphics drivers, which allocate more memory than most other drivers.
Justin changed the memory layout used by our memory manager to increase the amount of system PTEs.
This fixed the hard-to-debug slowdown bug with Nvidia graphics drivers.
On AMD video drivers, the OpenGL window would end up blank.
This was resolved by rewriting `ExtEscape`, inspired by a patch from the late core developer James Tabor ([jimtabor](https://github.com/jimtabor)).
These improvements enhanced stability, better handled resource management of the new devices, and fixed many edge case bugs in our `win32k.sys` driver.
We thank our contributors and developers for their time as these fixes needed an incredible amount of research.

## Audio
Prior to 0.4.16, ReactOS had incomplete High Definition (HD) audio support.
HD audio drivers depend on a bus driver (`hdaudbus.sys`), including drivers from AMD, IDT, Nvidia, Realtek, and SigmaTel.
Our initial implementation was written long ago by Johannes Anderwald ([janderwald](https://github.com/janderwald)).

> This implementation was never finished, and was a frequent source of bugchecks when attempting to install audio codecs with an HD audio controller.

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to rephrase the 2nd part of this sentence a bit, to avoid using some terms with wrong meanings. As follows:
```suggestion
This implementation was never finished, and was a frequent source of bugchecks when attempting to install a drivers for an HD audio controller.
```
"HD audio codec" can also mean (and usually means in the most of cases) "hardware codec" or "hardware controller", while its driver should be explicitly defined as "HD audio codec driver" or "driver for an HD audio codec". So you can't simply install HD audio codec on codec (or controller on controller). 😄 
See the following for the reference:
<img width="652" height="120" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/24f740e1-e7aa-46f1-8a74-d617bd8bd22e" />
<img width="652" height="96" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d605a19d-cec5-415d-8ee6-5ac58c21c049" />

Author: Updated sentence to "This implementation was never finished, and was a frequent source of bugchecks when attempting to install HD audio controller drivers."

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Now it's fine. :+1:

Here is a video showing a Realtek HD audio controller working on ReactOS 0.4.16:

{{< video src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/hdaudbus.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="Setting up the installation, and file copy hang">}}

The new HD audio bus driver depends on the Kernel Mode Driver Framework (KMDF).
Microsoft open sourced KMDF as part of the [Windows-Driver-Frameworks](https://github.com/microsoft/Windows-Driver-Frameworks) repository.
Justin imported KMDF for the new HD audio bus driver, and now we can use KMDF to import or develop other drivers.

Oleg also fixed the volume and balance sliders in Sound Properties (`mmsys.cpl`) and Audio Volume Mixer (`sndvol32.exe`).
Now the volume and balance levels are saved and restored on reboot when using an HD audio codec.
In addition, Oleg updated the audio device enumeration code to support more sound cards.
On top of that, Oleg improved binary compatibility with the Windows audio stack thanks to some fixes he contributed to our Plug and Play (PnP) stack and SetupAPI.

## Storage
Since 2009, ReactOS has been using the UniATA storage driver to add SATA, AHCI, and support for partitions greater than 8GB.

> This was a huge help to ReactOS then, but today UniATA is responsible for slow boot times and failing to load on many devices; leading to the dreaded `INACCESSIBLE_BOOT_DEVICE` (`0x7B`) bugcheck.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This was a huge help to ReactOS then, but today UniATA is responsible for slow boot times and failing to load on many devices, leading to the dreaded `INACCESSIBLE_BOOT_DEVICE` (`0x7B`) bugcheck.
```

Unfortunately, this broke our ability to repair FAT partitions using chkdsk.
Core developer Doug Lyons ([Doug-Lyons](https://github.com/Doug-Lyons)) fixed our FAT chkdsk routines to work with the Microsoft FastFAT driver.

Core developer Mark Jansen ([learn-more](https://github.com/learn-more)) added a disk cleanup utility in ReactOS 0.4.16.
The disk cleanup utility is compatible with extensions for the Windows disk cleanup utility, allowing third party programs to clean up disk usage as well as the operating system.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/chkdsk.png" src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/chkdsk.png" caption="Check disk">}}
{{< figure link="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/cleanmgr.png" src="/img/project-news/reactos-0416-released/cleanmgr.png" caption="Disk cleanup">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

## Networking
During ReactOS 0.4.15 development, Dmitry introduced a new DC21X4 network adapter driver for better hardware compatibility.
This driver is used on devices with DECchip 21x4-based network adapters, and virtualized environments such as Microsoft Virtual PC 2007 and Hyper-V Generation 1.

> Now ReactOS 0.4.16 can boot and access the internet on Hyper-V Generation 1.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now ReactOS 0.4.16 can boot and access the Internet on both.
```

ReactOS 0.4.16 also adds asynchronous connection support.
This improves networking performance by allowing applications to execute networking operations without stalling.
This also improves application compatibility as many programs assume that these asynchronous connection APIs are always present.

## ReactOS Server Core
ReactOS supports Workstation and Server installation types.
In a Workstation install, more fancy graphical options are enabled by default compared to a Server install.

> In addition, user folders on Workstation installs currently live inside the "My Documents" folder; although Windows Vista and newer moved these folders out of the "Documents" folder for both Server and Workstation installs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, user folders on Workstation installs currently live inside the "My Documents" folder, although Windows Vista and newer moved these folders out of the "Documents" folder for both Server and Workstation installs.
```

## Graphical Installer and the All-in-One Boot CD
Historically, ReactOS offered two images for download, a livecd which let you test ReactOS in a read-only environment, and a bootcd which let you install ReactOS to your harddisk using a text-based installer.
With ReactOS 0.4.16, we are introducing a new graphical installer and a combined bootcd and livecd.
Now you can test and install ReactOS using the same image.

## Driver Support
During 0.4.16 development, core developer The_DarkFire_ recognized that the kernel was running out of system page table entries (PTEs) when loading third party drivers.
This limitation was most apparent with graphics drivers, which allocate more memory than most other drivers.
The_DarkFire_ changed the memory layout used by our memory manager to increase the amount of system PTEs.
This fixed a hard-to-debug slowdown bug with Nvidia graphics drivers, increased the success rate of using AMD graphics drivers, and got Intel graphics drivers to load much further.

## Networking
ReactOS 0.4.16 introduces asynchronous connection support.
This greatly improves networking performance by allowing applications to execute networking operations without stalling.

> This also improves application compatibility as many programs assume that these asynchronous connection APIs are always present.

Reviewer 5: It looks like I don't have permission to modify or add changes to this pull request. Therefore, I simply suggest adding the information from my PR (#147) to the text, following Mark Jensen's recommendation:

`In the previous 0.4.15 release notes, we forgot to mention that Dmitry Borisov's contribution has improved support for additional legacy networking hardware with the introduction of a new DC21X4 network adapter driver. This expands ReactOS compatibility with older DECchip 21x4-based adapters and improves networking support in legacy virtualization environments using emulated DEC 21140 hardware available in Microsoft Virtual PC 2007 and Hyper-V Generation 1.`

Reviewer 5: Then the press release will double-highlight the improvement for Hyper-V

Author: I added a section about Dmitry's network adapter that was added with 0.4.15

---
title:       "Introducing ReactOS 0.4.16"
author:      "ReactOS Team"
date:        2026-07-02
tags:        [ "release" ]
---

> 

Reviewer 2: Here we probably need to say hello to our followers first I guess:
```suggestion

Hello ReactOS followers!
```
or even better like this:

```suggestion

Greetings ReactOS followers!
```

Reviewer 2: So, do we plan to apply this suggestion? Or it's actually not required?

Author: I don't think it's required

Reviewer 2: OK, then it's fine as-is.

We are pleased to announce the release of ReactOS 0.4.16!
After a year and a half of development, we’re excited to showcase the improvements we’ve made between a new graphical installer, a unified bootcd and livecd image, better driver support, networking and storage stack improvements, and third-party code syncs.

## Graphical Installer and the All-in-One Boot CD
Historically, ReactOS offered two images for download, a livecd which let you test ReactOS in a read-only environment, and a bootcd which let you install ReactOS to your harddisk using a text-based installer.
With ReactOS 0.4.16, we are introducing a new graphical installer and a combined bootcd and livecd.

> Now you can test and install ReactOS using the same image.

Reviewer: I would suggest linking to parts 2 and 3 of the blogs, that described the overhauling of the setup:
https://reactos.org/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning/
https://reactos.org/blogs/gui-setup-part3-first-testing-problems/
(or maybe only the part 3 maybe??)

Author: I linked all 3, for consistency.

## Driver Support
During 0.4.16 development, core developer The_DarkFire_ recognized that the kernel was running out of system page table entries (PTEs) when loading third party drivers.
This limitation was most apparent with graphics drivers, which allocate more memory than most other drivers.
The_DarkFire_ changed the memory layout used by our memory manager to increase the amount of system PTEs.

> This fixed a hard-to-debug slowdown bug with Nvidia graphics drivers, increased the success rate of using AMD graphics drivers, and got Intel graphics drivers to load much further.

Reviewer 6: thiis like 5% of what actually happened here. I'll make a comment improving this section a lot in the next few days

Reviewer 7: One correction I initially thought the PTE fixes solved the Nvidia slowdown bug partially due to regressions that made it difficult to determine the exact point it was solved.

julenuri and i verified it was the combination of P6CACHE enablement in both videoprt and ntoskrnl

discussion is in this jira report
https://jira.reactos.org/browse/CORE-20298

and the relevant fixes but note between Hervé Poussineau and Adam Słaboń fixes there is a videoprt regression that lead to the confusion.

https://git.reactos.org/?p=reactos.git;a=commit;h=59ae6b3e15d78df2d86efa7c55fc88fa08c9636b
https://git.reactos.org/?p=reactos.git;a=commit;h=afbadf5c4418ad3da09b7af4c819f2939d71f8e3

Reviewer 6: Note for myself for later:

https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8536
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8554
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8613
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8638
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8644
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/pull/8646
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/08a68340750adffc7912e06fc761d762a8a9c22e
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/cfde03ec9bbb3a5487443e879eadd0c5cbc0030c
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/b80d806e05380aef33e3f7626807271e661c4b94
https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/e9b5b22a8c308483d0c883a2d40189df433bacad

Reviewer 6: For 0.4.15 development, core developer hpoussin put in the ground work for multimonitor support and vga fallback when display drivers fail. The foundation put into 0.4.15 allowed us to continue striving for better video driver compatibility in 0.4.16. For years ReactOS has been plagued by different issues with all of the major video driver vendors.
NVIDIA GPUs in particular had been plagued by a slow down issue that many talented contributors and developers attempted to investigate. Eventually core developer The_DarkFire_ recognized that the kernel was running out of system page table entries (PTEs) when loading third party drivers. This limitation was most apparent with graphics drivers, which allocate more memory than most other drivers. The_DarkFire_ with guidance changed the memory layout used by our memory manager to increase the amount of system PTEs. This fixed a hard-to-debug slowdown bug with Nvidia graphics drivers. AMD was a different story where the OpenGL window would end up blank, this was resolved by rewriting ExtEscape inspired by the initial patch by late core developer Jimtabor. While these improvements stand out to get GPU drivers from all 3 vendors working, it involved an incredible amount of research and guidance from many of the contributors and developers to improve stability, handle resource management of the new devices, and fix many edge case bugs in our win32k.

## Networking
ReactOS 0.4.16 introduces asynchronous connection support.
This greatly improves networking performance by allowing applications to execute networking operations without stalling.
This also improves application compatibility as many programs assume that these asynchronous connection APIs are always present.

> 

Reviewer 2: It definitely makes sense to mention recent audio improvements made during 0.4.16-dev in this place too (e. g., new HDAudBus bring-up (and KMDF required by it), audio volume control support improvements and fixes, audio devices enumeration fix which fixes non-working audio device detection with some sound cards (e. g., Realtek HD Audio) etc.).
I can even write an initial article for that if you prefer (it might be improved/fixed later as well). 😉 
Like this:

```suggestion

## HD audio support
For a couple of years, ReactOS had unstable and very incomplete High Definition (HD) audio controllers support,
which is represented by HD audio bus driver (hdaudbus.sys), required and widely used by a lot of 3rd party HD audio codecs (AMD, IDT, NVIDIA, Realtek, SigmaTel etc).
Its implementation written by Johannes Anderwald in the far past, was mostly stubbed and non-working at all,
causing blue screens each time when attempting to install any audio codec for an appropriate HD audio controller.

But now, our core developer Oleg Dubinskiy imported a new modern HD audio bus driver which was initially written
for Windows 10, from the following repository: https://github.com/coolstar/sklhdaudbus (BSD-3-Clause license).
And Justin Miller has imported a new functionality from (open source) Microsoft Kernel Mode Driver Framework (KMDF), which is used by that driver as well.

This allows to properly support a lot of HD audio controllers which are compatible with (and have a codec driver for) Windows XP and Windows Server 2003.
For example, Realtek High Definition (HD) audio codec R2.74 for Windows XP has been successfully tested and is confirmed to be working properly in ReactOS
with Realtek ALC660 HD audio controller on Asus-F5R test notebook at least:
https://private-user-images.githubusercontent.com/26385117/584169871-b6474c2c-160b-4eb8-992c-3608854c92f5.mp4?jwt=eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.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.FlnzOhDvwcJ-_Td4pbK12ZEQugwYisVGQqA0guMNi8Y

## Other audio enhancements
ReactOS 0.4.16 also introduces other audio improvements and fixes.

In particular, Oleg also fixed improper volume control handling (audio volume level changing) from Control Panel -> Sound Properties (mmsys.cpl) and Audio Volume Mixer (sndvol32.exe).
So now, the volume sliders are moving correctly, actually changing volume level and volume balance properly.
For an HD audio codecs, the volume level set by user is also properly saved and restored upon OS reboot.

Another fix he made, is fixing audio devices enumeration code, which allows to properly enumerate all audio devices and skip invalid/improperly detected ones,
and hence fixes incorrectly detected audio input/output and non-working sound with some audio cards.

```

Reviewer 2: Newlines to be added and wording to be corrected in some places.

Author: No worries, this is just the working draft. I wanted to get it out so people can start thinking about how they want to add onto it 🙂

Reviewer: > https://private-user-images.githubusercontent.com/<super_very_long_SUS_URL>

I'm sure there's a way to simplify that (also "private" on github may not be available to everyone -- I tested the link and I just get a black empty webbrowser page).

Reviewer 2: > > https://private-user-images.githubusercontent.com/<super_very_long_SUS_URL>
> 
> I'm sure there's a way to simplify that (also "private" on github may not be available to everyone -- I tested the link and I just get a black empty webbrowser page).

Yeah, seems it needs to upload that video into Web-Content directly, to make able to play it on the page directly, as in the following example:
https://github.com/reactos/web-content/blob/master/content/blogs/newsletter-104.md#audio-improvements
(looking to the video file URL, it's actually inside Web-Content repository)

Reviewer 2: OK, added some newlines now and corrected wording a little bit in my suggestion above.

Reviewer 2: :white_check_mark: OK, now re-formatted and improved the wording in my audio improvements suggestion much more.

Reviewer 2: Now only GitHub's video URL is to be fixed I guess.

## Storage
Since 2009, ReactOS has been using the UniATA storage driver to add SATA, AHCI, and support for partitions greater than 8GB.
This was a huge help to ReactOS then, but today UniATA is responsible for slow boot times and failing to load on many devices; leading to the dreaded INACCESSIBLE_BOOT_DEVICE (0x7B) bug check.
ReactOS 0.4.16 introduces a new ATA driver developed by contributor disean.
This new ATA driver allows ReactOS to boot in far more environments, including inside Hyper-V.

> 

Reviewer 2: It makes sense to add a separate title for this section, since the following two items actually belong to standard applications ant tools, not to storage drivers.
```suggestion

## Utilities and applications
```

Author: No, I think these fit cleanly under "storage" title, these applications are for managing storage.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, OK. Makes sense to keep it as-is then.

In 2021 we imported and enabled the open-source Microsoft FastFAT driver.
Unfortunately, this broke our ability to repair FAT partitions using chkdsk.

> Core developer Doug Lyons fixed our FAT chkdsk routines to work with the Microsoft FastFAT driver.

Reviewer 2: Minor wording improvement.
```suggestion
Core developer Doug Lyons fixed our FAT chkdsk routines to properly work with the Microsoft FastFAT driver.
```

With each release we come closer to fulfilling this goal.
We look forward to sharing more developments and progress with you.

We extend our deepest gratitude to our community, contributors and donors.
Without our contributors, we wouldn’t be able to make any development progress.
Without our donors, we couldn’t fund our testing and hosting infrastructure or development contracts to accelerate progress.
And without our community, no one would know we exist.
Thank you for making ReactOS possible.

If you are interested in joining our community, contributing, or donating to the ReactOS project, check out our homepage to find our donation page, social media links, and our GitHub.

Sincerely,

The ReactOS Team

[Download ReactOS 0.4.16](https://reactos.org/download/)

## Statistics
Resolved Jira issues: 375 (REMOVE ME: as of 7/1/2026)

Commits: 2735 (REMOVE ME: as of 7/1/2026)

Oldest Jira issue resolved: [CORE-3804](https://jira.reactos.org/browse/CORE-3804) from February 3rd, 2009 

-	[0.4.16 Resolved Issues](https://reactos.org/wiki/0.4.16_Resolved_Issues)

> -	[0.4.16 Commit History](https://reactos.org/wiki/0.4.16_Commit_History)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [0.4.16 Resolved Issues](https://reactos.org/wiki/0.4.16_Resolved_Issues)
- [0.4.16 Commit History](https://reactos.org/wiki/0.4.16_Commit_History)
```
(replacing TAB chars by spaces.)
